So I think if you're here at this conference and you're like me, probably you feel that R has a
first-class place within any modern data science team, right? You know, kind of posit, use a lot
of R, and that was most of my career. But the thing is, is that a lot of the time that decision is
not really up to you. And you can find yourself in a position where the tools that you kind of know
and love, actually you're prevented for whatever reason from using them to accomplish your goals,
right? I wanted to start this out by talking about one of my kind of larger career mistakes,
and aside from going to law school, this is maybe like my largest career mistake. Law school still
ends. So I was hired by a company called Socure to build shiny apps and to improve their R tooling,
right? R functions to help teach people to use R better, and I was good at that. And I was at
Socure during this, I was lucky enough to be there during a time of really extraordinary growth. So
this company hit right at the right time and doubled revenue basically every year for about
three years. And with that growth came one important challenge, which is that in order to, the way our
business was structured, every sort of marginal increase in revenue required more and more data
scientists. So by the end I think we were hiring something like 40 a year. And finding data
scientists who knew something about identity fraud and also were good enough at R was very difficult.
So the company at some point decided that we're gonna standardize on Python to have access to a
larger hiring pool. Right around this time my boss came up to me and said, Gordon, you know, I love
the work you've done with with R, can you do the same thing with Python? What I should have said
was, yes, of course, it's Python. You know, it's not that far away. I know this problem domain very well.
I feel like I have a good intuition about how people analyze data. I can do that. But I didn't do that.
I didn't do it because I had a lot of doubt about my own intuition about how to build good Python
tools, and just kind of like a basic lack of familiarity. My R skills were so good at that
point that whenever I tried using Python I felt like I was all thumbs. And since then I've kind of
been wondering, like, what was it, you know, that prevented me from having that confidence? Like,
what was it that I didn't have? Of course, my whole career people have been telling me to learn
Python. And I tried. I'd taken online courses, built little projects, etc., etc. And I think there's a
couple of reasons why it's really difficult, or why I found it really difficult. The first one is
that this goal is just absolutely terrible advice. Learn Python in the generic sense is a terrible
advice. Because of course there are many Pythons. You know, like, you talk to somebody who's a data
scientist and they say the important skill is pandas. You talk to somebody else who is a, you
know, does a web serving project in Python and they'll tell you that pandas is a horrible dependency
that'll ruin your life, right? So it doesn't really have any particular meaning. And because it doesn't
have any particular meaning, you don't know the answer to a lot of these questions. When are you
done? You know, what particular value does that provide to you in the short term? And how do you
prove it, right? And all these things kind of prevent you from making progress, right? It's not a good
goal. Secondly, R and Python are extremely close substitutes. They do, especially in the data
science space, they do almost identical things. You know, we just heard that from Plot9, right? You
have ggplot in R, Plot9 in Python, right? They're substitutes. You can do the same thing with them.
And I would say for almost every task that you can point me to in Python, I can say I can do it in R and vice
versa, right? And the cost of that, what that means is that there's this incredible awkwardness when you're
trying to learn something that's almost exactly like what you already know, right? Because you're using it
and you feel like you should already know how to do this thing, right? They're close enough that you feel
like you should know it, but they're far enough away that you really don't, right? And because they're such
close substitutes, in the short run, it doesn't feel valuable. You don't get that feedback that you get when
you first start programming or when you start programming in a language that's truly different from
one you know, which is that I have gained some new ability that I didn't have before. So I learned, my
second language was actually React Native when I wrote a mobile application, and that was easy to learn,
right? Because I was able to sort of do something I couldn't do before, write something that goes on
somebody's phone, you know, that was amazing. Can't do that in R, couldn't do it in R. So there's a lot of
different ways of kind of coming up with a better goal for learning these systems. Like you often hear
SMART, like Specific Something Something Actionable, I can never remember. Lots of different acronyms. But
the one I kind of gravitate towards is really simple, which is, you might call this like value-based
learning. And really what this means is that you need something, whenever you're learning a new
thing, you need to find the part of that thing that provides you with real value really quickly. When I
say real value, this is, I think, crucial, right? A lot of times when you learn a new thing, you use a toy
example or one that's provided by the sort of generic way of educating a shelf, and it doesn't
really kind of do the job, because you're not really stressing your understanding of it. You're not
trying to accomplish a goal that you personally care about. So real value here, I think, usually
means, in a work context, something that generates money or saves time. And it doesn't necessarily
need to be that, but most of the time that's what it is. So picking a part of that project where
you're able to show that to somebody else in your life, your boss or your co-worker, and they're
impressed. They see that there's some value for themselves and their organization. And the second
thing is that you need to have that part where you realize that value extremely quickly. I think in a
matter of weeks, you should be able to take something from that educational experience, show
someone else, and justify the time that you've spent on it. I don't know about yourself, but I have a
fairly busy job and two young children, and all of my time is spoken for. So I need something where it
gives me that value right away. So why is Shiny for Python a good option under this framework? I think
there's three reasons, and this is what most of this talk is going to be about. Shiny for Python is the
thing if you're an R developer, you want to diversify your career, don't end up like Gordon, have
something where you're in your back pocket if you ever end up in this situation. Shiny for Python is
the ideal thing to do. There's three reasons for this. The first is that it gives you something that
you don't have. The second is that it's better than other Python web application frameworks. And
finally, you already mostly know it. So what do you get? And I should specify here that the R Shiny
application framework is not going anywhere. It's the leader on our team. It's where features probably
land first and are going to land first for a while. And we have a huge community of R users, people
who are building Shiny, R Shiny applications in incredible ways, doing incredible extensions. So
those aren't going anywhere. So feature-wise, it's not like you get a bunch of features that you don't
have in R. But you do get a couple of things. So the first one is you get much easier deployment in
various different entities, right? So this is something that, over my career as a Shiny developer,
has come up again and again and again, which is I build something that's useful, great even,
impressive, and then you kind of go to deploy it, and you run into all kinds of barriers. And these
apps, these undeployed apps that live on my laptop, mostly worthless, right? And R deployments are a
little bit fraught, right? Because it's a niche language. It's often adding a dependency to any of
your deployment environments. And that can be pretty difficult. So you get into a lot of these
questions. And whether you think these questions are right or wrong, valid or invalid, they're things
that people believe and that prevent you from deploying your apps, right? DevOps doesn't know how to
use R. Will this scale? What happens if you leave? Who will I hire to do this? Right? Shiny for
Python doesn't really have these problems because it's a kind of, it's built on foundational Python
web application frameworks. So people will at least think that they can deploy it and manage it,
right? Because a DevOps person will look at it and say, oh, it's just a Python, it's an ASGI Python
application. I can probably handle that, right? In a way that when you're trying to deploy an R
application of any kind, you can kind of often run into those problems. Second reason is that it's
much easier to integrate into Python, the Python ecosystem. And especially over the last year, you've
seen just so many incredible things that have come out of Python frameworks, large language models,
things like that. And, well, it's, you can integrate these things with something like
Reticulate in a lot of way, a lot of the time, like 95% of the time, that 5% of the time can be really
painful, right? So, because Reticulate runs Python in R, so it's adding like two layers of things on
top of your framework. You can kind of end up in these edge cases that are pretty difficult. Not
everything works. Environments can be challenging. And especially if you're working in industry,
it's very hard to get help. If you're having trouble installing somebody's kind of internal
janky Python package and they come over to your desk and you're like, hey, I'm trying to install
it in R, like whether it's the R's problem or their's problem, they're going to say it's R's
problem, right? So having something where you just have a single language at runtime is really helpful
for integrating those things. One language is simpler. And the final thing is it proves that
you know Python. And this is something that I think is really unique about building web applications,
is that they serve as a kind of visual proof to other people and to yourself that you know how to
provide value in Python, right? Even if your code is not the best, right? Even if you don't feel like
you really know how you do it, the fact of the existence of that artifact is a way of sort of
proving to other people in your life that, yeah, you know how to do this, right? And validating it for yourself.
And the thing about that proof is that I really do think that the thing that you will produce,
especially if you're somebody who has a little bit of experience with Shiny for R, is going to be
really impressive to somebody who's looked only at Python web application frameworks. Because I
think Shiny is better. And this is something that I'm probably saying in a little more stark way
than I have said in other contexts. And better, of course, means different things to different people.
But my work on the Shiny for Python team right now, I wouldn't be doing that if I didn't think
it was the best, right? So I just wanted to clarify what do I mean by better? And for this
I have another story. Which is after we made this transition to Python, we put together
a web API that was for people to navigate our machine learning feature store.
Like, get information about features, change them, et cetera, et cetera. It's a great important thing of
centralizing this thing that we dealt with all the time. It caused a huge amount of friction.
And it needed a front end. And we sort of looked around and said, okay, well, we're a Python shop
now, how are we going to build this front end? And, you know, looked at various different options
and the decision was, like, we're going to do it in React. We're going to build it in a, you know,
there's going to be a web application and JavaScript front end, you know, be super pro, right?
Wouldn't have any React developers on the team. So this implied hiring. And hiring implied budget.
And budget implied approval. And ten months later we still didn't have this kind of value,
realized. We didn't have the product, right? And that's the thing that I really hate personally,
as whenever I've worked on a data science team, is that I want my team to be able to deliver
the whole project, right? I don't want to have the situation where we built the model, we built the
API, we did something, and then there's another team that we have to wait on or get cajole or get
approval or get roadmap space to finish the project and actually show it to the user, right? I want to
have something where we can do the whole thing, right? This is what Shiny does and I think what
makes Shiny so special. So the way I kind of talk about this is an idea that you might call
programmatic range, right? It's a framework that can do a lot of things and can do it smoothly.
And a lot of the other web application frameworks that you talk about, they sort of say like, look,
we can do simple things, we can do complicated things, but when you dig in, you realize that
they're doing the simple thing and the complicated thing in totally different ways, right? It's almost
as if they're like several frameworks in a trench coat, you know? And there's like, you have this
simple thing and then like, oh, you're a little more complicated, like, let's learn a whole new
pattern and you're a little more complicated than that, oh, we're gonna do a whole new thing, right?
And Shiny is not like that. Shiny has the same pattern for every single Shiny app, reactivity,
right? So if you know it, I taught a workshop on Saturday, the things that we taught them that day,
first time people experiencing Shiny, those are the same things that are done in the most
complicated Shiny apps. And so Shiny has this ability to serve you from very, very simple
things to very, very complicated things. So that means for like that API example, if we wanted to
build a prototype in Shiny just to get us to that 10 months until we have that React developer who
can build something real, you know, that works, right? It's fast enough to do that, easy enough
to do that. But if it turns out we actually don't want to hire that person or we can't,
that prototype can smoothly grow into the product and Shiny has all the tools for doing it.
So you don't need to hire anyone, right? That's my kind of definition of better, I guess.
And so I just kind of wanted to give a little bit of a, there's about 20 different Python web
application frameworks, so I'm not going to go through all of them, but I wanted to go through
the ones that I've sort of seen being most commonly used in the businesses that I've talked to.
So Streamlet is a very popular one, it's a wonderful language, it's optimized for, a wonderful
framework, it's optimized for very, very simple applications. And that's kind of their load stars,
like let's get the simple stuff to work and we will go, we will sacrifice anything for that goal,
and the way they've done this is by running the entire script from top to bottom on every user
interaction. So this is a little bit like if you're running a parameterizer or a markdown
or something like that, where every time anything changes, the whole thing runs, right? And if you
think about this, that probably seems pretty inefficient, it is, and that's because it's
sort of where their design space is, it's very, very close to this beginner experience of getting
something working. But this means that complex apps, in my opinion, are not really possible,
right? Like at some point you reach this cliff with Streamlet where you have to throw it away,
right? And you cannot grow into a product at some point, right? Not to say you can't do
impressive things with it, but there's a sort of line where it doesn't work. And simple things
are oddly difficult, like updating a slider, changing a button color, these things require
JavaScript or at least state management. Dash is built around this idea of statelessness,
and what that means is that each graph and table and component of your application
has to be able to do everything independently. It's very difficult to share data between these
two things. So if you had CSV that generated 20 plots, a kind of usual way of accomplishing that
in Dash, not the only way, but a usual way, is to have that CSV be read in for each plot 20 times,
right? And you can sort of share data, but it involves caching it in the browser or storing it
into a database and having it reread and lots of things like that. So this is like if you imagine
Shiny without reactive expressions or any reactive value or server state, it would kind of
be something where it's like pretty flat experience, right? You don't have this idea of like caching an
intermediary value and using it in many places. This is important. It does solve an important
problem, which is Dash apps are incredibly easy to scale horizontally. You can have one app be
served by many processes on a server or even many servers, so that's it's really good. My guess is
that I've never had that problem. I'm not sure that many people actually do. And finally, these are
kind of the Django, Flask, FastAPI, the sort of combination of an API layer that's written in
Python with some front end. This is really good for many kind of larger applications, very steep
learning curve, and you need to write and maintain your own front end. So the last reason, so those
are kind of what you get, right? You get to do something you can't do, and you give your boss or
your company something that they can't do. But the cost side is also really low, because I think most
of the people who are kind of familiar with R Shiny actually already know Shiny for Python. And
the reason is that when you kind of are learning Shiny, you feel like you're learning an R package,
right? Because there's only an R package. But most of the concepts and things that you're actually
dealing with are sort of generic parts of the components. So you can think about Shiny and
Shiny for R and Shiny for Python as being client libraries to the same general framework. So most
of what you know from Shiny for R is transferable, like how reactivity works, when to use reactives
versus observers, when to use a module, how to style applications. And then the wonderful thing
about today's world is that ChatGPT can really fill in the rest. So if you know how to use Shiny,
but you don't know how to draw a plot in Python, like me a little while ago, you can use ChatGPT
to translate your ggplot code into Seaborn or Plot9 or whatever you want. So this kind of, like,
I think is a perfect value-based learning tool, right? To get you over that hump and give you
that confidence that you can actually build it, right? It gives you value, provides integration
options, gives your employer value because it does things that they can't really do right now.
And there's a very fast time to value because most of the knowledge that you maybe already have
from the R framework is transferable over to the Python framework. You're already an expert. If
you're an expert in Shiny for R, I really do believe that you're already today an expert in
Shiny for Python. So everybody go tell Jared Leonard that. So we're still in the early stages
of sort of developing this project. So I just wanted to give a little bit of call out for
things that you can do if you want to jump in. So joining the Discord is great. Porting an R
Shiny extension over to Python. This is a very easy thing to do and provides a lot of value
because you already have the API that's working. You already have the JavaScript which you can use.
And it's really just translating the R functions to the Python functions. And if you're at an
organization that has a large Python group or just a small Python group and wants to talk to some of
the Shiny for Python team, feel free to contact me and book a webinar. And thank you.